Doc/library/distutils.rst, before:

:mod:`distutils` --- Building and installing Python modules
===========================================================

.. module:: distutils
   :synopsis: Support for building and installing Python modules into an
              existing Python installation.
.. sectionauthor:: Fred L. Drake, Jr. <fdrake@acm.org>


The :mod:`distutils` package provides support for building and installing
additional modules into a Python installation.  The new modules may be either
100%-pure Python, or may be extension modules written in C, or may be
collections of Python packages which include modules coded in both Python and C.


User documentation and API reference are provided in another document:

.. seealso::

   :ref:`distutils-index`
      The manual for developers and packagers of Python modules.  This describes
      how to prepare :mod:`distutils`\ -based packages so that they may be
      easily installed into an existing Python installation.  It also contains
      instructions for end-users wanting to install a distutils-based package,
      :ref:`install-index`.

Commit message:

Close #19407: New installation & distribution guides
- based on pip and other PyPA tools
- includes references to the new Python Packaging User Guide
  where appropriate (and the relevant section is at least
  partially filled in)
- started new FAQ sections
- both guides aim to introduce users to basic open source
  concepts if they aren't aware of them
- existing guides have been relocated (now linked from the
  distutils docs) rather then removed, since there is
  some needed material that has yet to be relocated to the
  distutils docs as a reference for the legacy formats

Doc/library/distutils.rst, after:

:mod:`distutils` --- Building and installing Python modules
===========================================================

.. module:: distutils
   :synopsis: Support for building and installing Python modules into an
              existing Python installation.
.. sectionauthor:: Fred L. Drake, Jr. <fdrake@acm.org>


The :mod:`distutils` package provides support for building and installing
additional modules into a Python installation.  The new modules may be either
100%-pure Python, or may be extension modules written in C, or may be
collections of Python packages which include modules coded in both Python and C.

Most Python users will *not* want to use this module directly, but instead
use the cross-version tools maintained by the Python Packaging Authority.
Refer to the `Python Packaging User Guide <http://packaging.python.org>`_
for more information.

For the benefits of packaging tool authors and users seeking a deeper
understanding of the details of the current packaging and distribution
system, the legacy :mod:`distutils` based user documentation and API
reference remain available:

* :ref:`install-index`
* :ref:`distutils-index`
